Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking about
the life of Charlie Chaplin.
He is, by some measures, the most
famous actor in history, and the story
of his life is as fascinating as it is
controversial, and as unlikely as it
was, in hindsight, almost inevitable.
It’s a tale of poverty, wealth,
comedy, tragedy, sexual misconduct,
communism, fascism, and more.
So, let's not waste a minute
and get right into it.
You might know the English
expression “rags to riches”.
We use it to describe the story of
someone who goes from growing up poor,
without much money, to great success.
It’s a term that journalists like to use.
The riches part is normally
factually correct, as the people
they are describing are usually
rich and famous; they have “riches”.
The rags part is not always quite correct.
Sure, it might be someone who grew
up without much money, but they were
normally not literally destitute,
forced to wear rags for clothes.
The story of Charlie Chaplin, however,
can most certainly be described
as rags to riches, as he went from
extreme poverty to becoming the
best-paid actor, debatably even the
highest-paid person, in the entire world.
He was born on April 16th,
1889, in Victorian London, the
second son of two entertainers.
His mother was a singer, his father
also worked on stage, but they separated
shortly after Charlie was born.
Life was tough from the start.
His father was an alcoholic, largely
absent from the young boy’s life, and
provided little financial support.
His mother tried to make ends meet,
singing in music halls, which were the
popular entertainment venues of the
time that combined comedy, singing,
and short theatrical performances.
She was good, reportedly, but it
was a tough, competitive world,
and money was hard to come by.
Still, it was the only world the young
boy knew, and his early years were spent
watching his mother sing and perform on
stage, copying her, as any child might do.
And when he was just five years
old, he took to the stage himself.
It wasn’t planned, I should add.
His mother was on stage, mid-performance,
singing to a packed audience.
And then, her voice started to crack.
She couldn't sing.
Her voice simply failed.
The audience started to boo, to
jeer at her, making fun of her.
The young Charlie was watching from
the wings, the side of the stage.
The theatre manager, desperate to
salvage the situation, pushed the young
boy onto the stage to sing instead.
He did.
And the crowd loved him.
The thing was, his mother’s breakdown
on stage wasn’t simple exhaustion
or some temporary illness; it was
caused by what we would now politely
describe as mental health issues.
Her mental health was deteriorating,
and she wasn’t able to
financially support her children.
So, she did what many destitute
Victorian parents were forced to do:
send their children to the workhouse,
and that is where, at the age of
seven, Charlie Chaplin ended up,
together with his older brother.
Now, it’s worth pausing here for a moment
to talk about the idea of a “workhouse”.
Workhouses, in the Victorian era,
were places where the very poorest
people in society were sent if they
could not support themselves, or if
their parents could not support them.
And life inside was deliberately harsh.
Families were often separated,
food was basic, and the work
was hard and monotonous.
The idea was not just to provide shelter,
but to discourage people from ever
needing to rely on public help again.
If you know the story of Oliver Twist,
or you have ever seen the classic 1968
musical adaptation, you might remember
the scenes from the workhouse: children
in rags, forced to work all day long,
and given barely anything to eat.
And the reality the young Charlie
Chaplin lived was the reality
Charles Dickens described.
For a young child, it was a brutal
environment, and Chaplin would
later describe how humiliating
and frightening this time was.
He and his brother did get out, and
they briefly went to live with their
father, who was a full-on, abusive
and violent alcoholic by this point.
The authorities got involved, the boys
were reunited with their mother, but
her mental health had continued to
deteriorate, and she was completely
incapable of looking after them.
The boys – Charlie and his brother
– would spend several years floating
from workhouse to workhouse.
From an early age, Chaplin learned
two important lessons: how easily a
person could fall through the cracks
of society, and how quickly the
world could turn its back on you.
But he would also learn something
else; performance could be a way out.
He discovered that he had a remarkable
ability to make people laugh,
not through jokes, but through
movement, timing, and expression.
By the time he was a teenager, he had
joined a professional comedy troupe,
Fred Karno's company, one of the most
successful music hall acts in Britain.
Karno specialised in slapstick comedy,
physical humour with exaggerated
movements, and comic timing.
And Chaplin was good.
Very good.
In 1910, Karno’s company
travelled to the United States.
And for Chaplin, America
represented something entirely new.
Unlike Britain, with its rigid class
system, into which Chaplin was born
firmly at the very bottom, the United
States seemed to offer opportunity
without asking where you came from.
And during a second tour,
Chaplin caught the attention of
a film producer in Hollywood.
In 1913, he signed a contract with
Keystone Studios for the very respectable
wage of $150 a week, and just like
that, he crossed another invisible line,
from stage performer to film actor.
At first, his roles were unremarkable.
He played generic comic characters,
often little more than background
figures in short slapstick films.
But Chaplin was quick to experiment.
He adjusted his costume, his
walk and his facial expressions.
And then, almost by accident, he created
the character that would make him famous:
the Little Tramp, or simply, The Tramp.
He was told to put on something funny,
so he borrowed clothes from other actors:
baggy trousers, a tight jacket, a small
bowler hat, oversized shoes, and a cane.
He added a small toothbrush
moustache and that was it.
The Little Tramp, as the character
became known, was an instant hit.
A small, shabby figure with impeccable
manners and a kind heart, getting
into all sorts of trouble but
always maintaining his dignity.
And what made The Tramp so special
was that he transcended language.
Remember, these were silent films - no
dialogue, just actions and expressions.
Chaplin's genius was in his ability
to communicate emotion, humour,
and story through nothing but
movement and facial expressions.
Audiences loved The Tramp.
And the studios quickly noticed.
Chaplin had signed with Keystone for
$150 a week, which was double what
he had been earning with Fred Karno.
Not bad for a young man from the
workhouses of Victorian London.
But within just one year,
his value had exploded.
In 1915, the Essanay Film Manufacturing
Company lured him away from Keystone
with an offer of $1,250 a week,
plus a $10,000 signing bonus.
To put that in context, $10,000 in
1915 would be well over $300,000 today.
But that was nothing
compared to what came next.
In February 1916, just two years
after making his first film, Chaplin
signed a contract with the Mutual
Film Corporation that shocked the
entire entertainment industry.
$10,000 per week, plus a
$150,000 signing bonus.
In total, $670,000 for one year's work,
more than $20 million in today’s money.
At 26 years old, Charlie Chaplin had
become the highest-paid person in the
film industry, and arguably one of the
highest-paid people in the entire world.
The newspapers couldn't believe it.
The contract made front-page headlines.
People were astonished that someone
could be paid such an astronomical
sum just to make people laugh.
But the studio president explained it
simply: "We can afford to pay Mr. Chaplin
this large sum annually because the public
wants Chaplin and will pay for him."
And they did pay.
Chaplin's films were hugely
commercially successful.
By the early 1920s, Charlie
Chaplin was one of the most
famous people on the planet.
His films were shown everywhere from New
York to Tokyo, from Paris to Buenos Aires.
And he wasn't just acting in films.
In 1919, he co-founded United Artists,
a film studio, alongside some of the
biggest stars and directors of the era.
This gave Chaplin something
that few actors had: complete
artistic control over his work.
He chose the stories, directed the films,
edited them, and even composed the music.
He worked slowly, obsessively,
and entirely on his own terms.
And he was a legendary perfectionist.
There are stories of him shooting
the same scene 50, 100, once even 342
times, until it was exactly right.
But, it worked.
They were masterpieces.
The Kid, in 1921, mixing
comedy with genuine pathos.
The Gold Rush in 1925, with its iconic
scene of Chaplin eating a boiled shoe.
City Lights in 1931, a love story that
made audiences around the world weep.
But the film industry was changing,
and was about to have its biggest
shift to date: by the late 1920s,
so-called "talkies" had arrived.
Films with sound, with dialogue.
The entire industry was transforming.
Chaplin resisted.
He believed, probably correctly, that
The Tramp's universal appeal came from
his silence, from the fact that he
could be understood by anyone, anywhere,
regardless of what language they spoke.
He continued making silent films
well into the 1930s, long after
everyone else had moved on.
And remarkably, they were
still hugely successful.
But as his professional success
continued, his personal life was
becoming increasingly complicated,
and his political views were
making him powerful enemies.
Chaplin had a pattern of relationships
with very young women, relationships
that would almost certainly be considered
predatory by today’s standards.
He married four times, and three
of his wives were teenagers
when the relationships began.
His second wife, Lita Grey,
was 16 when they married.
His fourth wife, Oona
O'Neill, was 18 and he was 54.
The most damaging episode
came in the mid-1920s, during
his marriage to Lita Grey.
When the marriage collapsed, Grey
filed for divorce and accused Chaplin
of cruelty and what she described
as “perverted sexual desires”.
The case never went to trial.
Chaplin settled out of court, paying
a very large sum of money, and all
the details were never legally tested.
But the accusations were widely
reported in the press, and for the
first time, Chaplin’s image as a
lovable underdog was seriously damaged.
It was a turning point.
From this moment on, Chaplin
was no longer just a comedian.
He was a controversial public
figure, watched closely, criticised
harshly, and judged not only for
his work, but for his character.
In the 1930s, as the world
changed rapidly, Chaplin’s
films began to change too.
He had been resisting the move
to sound films longer than most,
worried that dialogue would destroy
the universality of his work.
But when he did speak,
he did so deliberately.
In Modern Times, in 1936, he
criticised the dehumanising
effects of industrial capitalism.
And in 1940, he took an even bigger risk.
He took a jab at someone whose
life and his were curiously
intertwined: Adolf Hitler.
The two men were born just four
days apart, in April of 1889.
They had both escaped poverty
through charisma and performance,
albeit in very different ways.
They were both instantly recognisable.
And they had the same
little dark moustache.
Chaplin’s response was The Great
Dictator, which was released in 1940.
It was his first true sound film,
and it was a bold, risky move.
At the time, the United States had
not yet entered the Second World
War, and many in Hollywood were
reluctant to criticise Hitler openly.
Chaplin was not.
In the film, he plays two roles:
a brutal dictator, clearly based
on Hitler, and a humble Jewish
barber who looks exactly like him.
Through satire and exaggeration,
Chaplin mocked fascism, militarism,
and the cult of personality that
surrounded authoritarian leaders.
And then, at the end of the film,
something remarkable happens.
The comedy stops.
Chaplin steps forward and delivers
a long, emotional speech, not as the
Tramp, not as a clown, but as himself.
He speaks about humanity,
kindness, democracy, and the
dangers of hatred and division.
It is a deeply sincere moment,
and it shocked audiences who were
used to seeing Chaplin communicate
only through gestures and silence.
Some people loved it.
Others were deeply uncomfortable.
To some, Chaplin was a
courageous moral voice.
To others, he was a foreigner
lecturing America about politics.
And this is where Chaplin’s problems
with the United States really began.
During the 1940s, America entered a
period of intense political paranoia.
Fear of communism spread through politics,
the media, and the entertainment industry.
Anyone with left-wing sympathies,
or even vaguely progressive
views, could fall under suspicion.
Chaplin had never been a member
of the Communist Party, but he
was openly critical of capitalism,
supportive of workers’ rights,
and vocal about social inequality.
He had also never become an
American citizen, despite having
lived in the country for decades.
To figures like J. Edgar Hoover,
the powerful head of the FBI,
Chaplin looked suspicious.
The FBI opened a file on him.
His speeches were analysed.
His personal life was scrutinised.
His past scandals were quietly revisited.
And newspapers began to portray him
not just as morally questionable,
but as politically dangerous.
Then came another scandal
In the early 1940s, a young
woman called Joan Barry accused
Chaplin of fathering her child.
Blood tests showed that he was not
the father, but under California law
at the time, this did not matter.
Chaplin was still ordered
to pay child support.
Once again, the legal outcome
mattered less than the headlines.
By the early 1950s, Chaplin had become
a deeply divisive figure in America.
He was admired by many,
but hated by others.
Protesters gathered outside his films.
Politicians spoke openly about
removing him from the country.
And in 1952, while Chaplin was
travelling to Europe for the
premiere of a new film, the US
government revoked his re-entry visa.
There was no trial.
No dramatic expulsion.
Just a bureaucratic decision.
Chaplin realised that
he was not welcome back.
At the age of 63, after spending
almost forty years in the United
States, his adopted country,
Charlie Chaplin went into exile.
He settled in Switzerland, in a quiet
village overlooking Lake Geneva, with
his wife Oona and their children.
He continued to work, but he was no
longer at the centre of global culture.
The man who had once been the
most famous person on Earth now
lived a relatively private life,
making a few films, but nothing
compared to his previous successes.
For years, he refused to
return to the United States.
Gradually, however,
attitudes began to change.
The hysteria of the Red Scare faded.
Chaplin’s films were re-evaluated.
A new generation discovered
his work, not as political
provocation, but as timeless art.
And in 1972, something
extraordinary happened.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts
and Sciences, the organisation behind
the Oscars, invited Chaplin back to
Los Angeles to receive an honourary
award for his contribution to cinema.
He accepted.
On April 10th, 1972, a frail 83-year-old
Charlie Chaplin walked onto the stage
at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion.
The audience rose to their feet.
And they kept clapping.
And clapping.
The standing ovation lasted twelve minutes
- one of the longest in Oscar history.
Chaplin, visibly moved,
struggled to speak.
When he finally could, he simply
said: "Words seem so futile, so
feeble... Thank you so very much."
Three years later, Queen
Elizabeth II knighted him.
He became Sir Charles Chaplin.
And two years after that, on Christmas
Day, 1977, at his lakeside home in
Switzerland, he died at the age of 88.
So, what should we make
of Charlie Chaplin?
Here was a man who created the most
universal character in the history of
cinema - a character who spoke no words
yet was understood in every language.
A character who represented the
little guy, the underdog, the
person trying to maintain their
dignity in an undignified world.
What might have seemed controversial
at the time, speaking out against
Adolf Hitler, was undoubtedly an
admirable and correct thing to do.
And yet the man himself was deeply flawed.
His relationships with young
women were, by today's standards
and even by the standards of his
own time, deeply inappropriate.
His political views, whether genuinely
held or simply naively expressed,
made him enemies in powerful places.
But perhaps that's what makes
his story so fascinating.
He wasn't a saint.
He was complicated,
contradictory, and controversial.
A man who brought joy to hundreds
of millions on screen, while in his
personal life he was clearly capable
of causing a great amount of pain
to people he should have loved.
From the workhouses of Victorian
London to the stages of Hollywood.
From beloved icon to exiled pariah
and back to honoured legend.
A fitting ending, perhaps, for
a man once described as “the
greatest clown ever to have lived”.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Charlie Chaplin.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Did you know this about
Charlie Chaplin’s life?
Are his films popular in your country?
And what other actors or actresses
would you like to hear about next?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.